---
title: "My response to \"The climate debate isn’t over\" by Amanda Baillieu"
date: 2009-11-17 08:00:00 +0000
categories: ["climate science"]
permalink: /my_response_to_the_climate_debate_isn_t_over_by_amanda_baillieu
---
Amanda Baillieu is the editor of "Building Design" magazine.  Her last
two editorials have argued - to quote her twitter feed - that
"[Basically believing in man made climate change is a bit like hoping
that fairies live at the bottom of the
garden.](http://twitter.com/AmandaBaillieu/status/5426280348)" I wrote
the following response to her last editorial "[The Climate Debate Isn't
Over](http://www.bdonline.co.uk/story.asp?storycode=3153086)", published
13th Nov 2009.  I submitted my comment for moderation on 14th Nov 2009
but so far it hasn't been published on the BD site.

Here's my response...

-----

This discussion is becoming rather surreal.  Amanda, you appear to be
attempting to have a conversation about science without referring once
to any actual data.  Surely that's akin to wanting to play football
without touching the ball; or building a house without using any
materials i.e. it completely defeats the point.

Many of your claims are simply not supported by the data.  Making
unfounded claims in no way qualifies as a rational debate.  If you want
to debate the science then do so on science's terms: with the data!  Or,
at the very least, tell us which websites / articles / books / films
you're getting your information from.

Let's run through some of your claims and provide evidence which speaks
to your claims:

1\) "the science is far from settled"

(I'm going to quote from
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/global-warming-scientific-consensus.htm>
)

> "The question of scientific consensus is posed in Examining the
> Scientific Consensus on Climate Change (Doran 2009). The authors
> surveyed 3146 earth scientists, asking them the following survey
> question:  "Do you think human activity is a significant contributing
> factor in changing mean global temperatures?"

97.4% of expert climate scientists agree with the statement.  Let's say
that one more time so it sinks in: 97.4% of expert climate scientists
agree that human activity is a significant contributing factor in
changing mean global temperatures.

2\) "...reliable forecasts of future climate are proving elusive."

ALL published climate models that I'm aware of predict an upward trend
in mean temperature by 2100, almost entirely due to anthropogenic
greenhouse gas emissions (and their feedbacks).  I repeat: ALL MODELS.
 That hardly qualifies as "elusive".

Yes, the two research groups which have attempted to predict
temperatures for the next 10 years have come up with different
conclusions.  But that's because natural variation can overwhelm the
CO2-forced warming on short time scales.  It is, in many ways, easier to
predict what will happen to global mean temperatures in 50 years than in
10, because in 50 years the accumulated warming caused by man made
greenhouse gasses will overwhelm the natural variation. This effect is
clear in the historical data and also explains why it's not possible to
falsify global warming due to a few years of cooling.

An illustration: my undersized central heating is programmed to come on
in my living room at 9pm tomorrow night.  I can say with a very high
degree of confidence that the room will be considerably warmer by 10pm
because by that time the warmth produced by the radiators will have
overwhelmed the cooling effect of any "natural variation".  But I can't
predict so well what the temperature will be at, say, 9:15pm because I
don't know whether the living room door will be left open by my wife, or
whether the solid brick walls will be damp or dry, or what the external
temperature will be etc etc.

3\) "and a huge number of other independent factors that are making the
earth warmer"

Examples?  You'll almost certainly find that all the "independent
factors" you speak of have been researched and are either explicitly
included in the models or are in some way accounted for.

Perhaps you're talking about the Sun.  You don't need a PhD in signal
processing to understand that the following graph neatly falsifies the
theory that the sun is responsible for recent warming trends:

<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Temp-sunspot-co2.svg>

So... to summarise.  Those of us who are convinced by the evidence we've
seen are not trying to suppress debate. The reason for the "othodoxy",
as you call it, is because the vast majority of the evidence supports
that hypothesis.

