---
title: "Gas consumption 2007-2011"
date: 2012-02-21 17:20:54 +0000
categories: ["green diary", "gas consumption", "insulation", "heating", "solar thermal"]
permalink: /gas_consumption_20072011_0
---
<!--Load the AJAX API-->

<script type="text/javascript"> 

    // Load the Visualizaation API and the corechart package 
    google.load("visualization", "1", {packages:["corechart"]}); 

    // Set a callback to run when the Google Visualization API is loaded 
    google.setOnLoadCallback(initialize);
    
    function initialize() {
        // Specify that we want to use the XmlHttpRequest object to make the query.
        var opts  = {sendMethod: 'auto'}; // For some reason 'xhr' doesn't work
        var gasQuery = new google.visualization.Query('https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/tq?key=0Astzk9pV1BPddEkzc0lEbFg2elVES1BPRGtpVlNkZ1E&range=A1%3AF5&headers=1',opts);

        var temperaturesQuery = new google.visualization.Query('https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/tq?key=0Astzk9pV1BPddEkzc0lEbFg2elVES1BPRGtpVlNkZ1E&gid=3&range=A1%3AF5&headers=1',opts);
        
        // Send the query with a callback function
        gasQuery.send(handleGasQueryResponse);
        temperaturesQuery.send(handleTemperaturesQueryResponse);
    }
    
    // Called when the query response in returned 
    function handleGasQueryResponse(response) {
        if (response.isError()) {
            alert('Error in query: ' + response.getMessage() + ' ' + response.getDetailedMessage());
            return;
        }
        drawGasChart(response.getDataTable());
    }
    
    // Called when the query response in returned 
    function handleTemperaturesQueryResponse(response) {
        if (response.isError()) {
            alert('Error in query: ' + response.getMessage() + ' ' + response.getDetailedMessage());
            return;
        }
        drawTemperaturesChart(response.getDataTable());
    }
    
    // Callback function 
    function drawGasChart(data) { 
        
        var options = {title: 'Our gas consumption',
                       width: 650, height:300,
                       hAxis: {title: 'Quarter'},
                       vAxis: {title: 'kWh' }
                       };

        var chart = new google.visualization.ColumnChart(document.getElementById('chart_div')); 
        chart.draw(data, options); 
    }
    
    function drawTemperaturesChart(data) { 
        
        var options = {title: 'Average temperatures',
                       width: 650, height:300,
                       hAxis: {title: 'Quarter'},
                       vAxis: {title: 'degrees C' }
                       };

        var chart = new google.visualization.ColumnChart(document.getElementById('tempchart_div')); 
        chart.draw(data, options); 
    }
</script>
I've finally gotten round to plotting our gas consumption on a graph.
I'm not expecting a measurable drop in our consumption yet. We finished
[insulating our living
room](/insulating_our_victorian_living_room_part_2) in July 2011 and I'm
only just getting round to [insulating our
bedrooms](/planning_to_insulate_bedrooms_this_weekend) (Feb 2012). We
installed a new condensing gas boiler and solar thermal in July 2011.
But we also had a baby in August 2011 so we've had the heating on far
more than normal for the last quarter of 2011!

<div id="chart_div">

</div>

<div id="tempchart_div">

</div>

<small>Temperature data from the [Heathrow MetOffice weather
station](http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/climate/uk/stationdata/)</small>

What does this data tell us? And why did it take a fair amount of effort
to plot our gas consumption?

<!--break-->

The solar thermal system (installed July 2011) looks like it reduced
2011's Q3 gas usage compared to previous years. In terms of heating,
every quarter of 2011 had the lowest or second lowest gas consumption;
but 2011 also had the warmest or second warmest q1 and q4 in the
timespan. I am pleased that our gas consumption for q4 2011 is the
second lowest in our record, despite that fact that we left heating
running all night every night (to keep our bedroom at 18 degrees C for
the baby) during q4 2011.

To produce these graphs, I had to interpolate our gas meter readings
using Python. I'll update this blog post with more details soon.

