---
title: "Why don\'t academics discuss research before starting the work?!"
date: 2013-11-28 15:03:26 +0000
categories: ["open science", "PhD"]
permalink: /why_dont_academics_discuss_research_before_starting_the_work
---
Warning: this is a hopelessly idealistic proposal...

As far as I can tell, scientists of all types tend to be secretive about
their work prior to publication. I guess the fear is that, without
secrecy, another lab might steal the idea and publish it first. But this
secrecy comes with several significant costs, one of which is the huge
length of time between first having an idea and then getting feedback
from peers. First you have your bright idea, then you do the necessary
research (which might take years), then you write up a paper, then you
submit the paper to a journal or conference and a while later you get
your first bit of peer feedback.

This feels extraordinarily inefficient. If an idea is bad then it needs
to fail fast (*before* resources have been expended). And if an idea
needs improving then it's far better to improve the proposal *before*
doing all the work rather than trying to retrofit a fix after the bulk
of the work has been done.

How about this as an alternative:<!--break-->

When you first have an idea, you describe it in a few paragraphs and
then submit it to an impartial website for comments from your peers.
Comments might be along the lines of "*Don't bother because Jo Blogs et
al did something similar a few years ago*" or "*that idea is
fundamentally flawed because of X*" or "*it's a crazy idea but it might
just work: give it a shot; but to convince me you'll need to demonstrate
Y*" or "*Great idea! I was thinking of doing something similar. Fancy
collaborating?*"

This way, you get very rapid feedback from your peers before you commit
large quantities of time and, possibly, money. You also get some
protection against people taking your ideas and claiming that they
thought of them first (because your ideas have been published; albeit in
embryonic form).

You could even do all your research out in the open so peers can
identify issues early on.

Why wouldn't this work?!

To give a bit of background to this blog post:

A few days ago, [Fernando Perez](https://twitter.com/fperez_org)
(creator of [IPython](http://ipython.org/), physicist and general
science hero) tweeted a few fascinating quotes from [an article in
National
Geographic](http://newswatch.nationalgeographic.com/2013/11/20/rising-star-hominid-what-we-know-and-dont-know/):

[1:41 PM - 22 Nov
13](https://twitter.com/fperez_org/status/403881023613579265):

> "We’re here sharing science. Science isn’t the answers, science is the
> process." Open science FTW @johnhawks
> http://newswatch.nationalgeographic.com/2013/11/20/rising-star-hominid-what-we-know-and-dont-know/

[1:56 PM - 22 Nov
13](https://twitter.com/fperez_org/status/403884776660029440) and [1:58
PM - 22 Nov
13](https://twitter.com/fperez_org/status/403885192386867200)

> "The most important implication of open access is the change in the
> scientific culture...... When you have a culture of secrecy, you breed
> people who trade in secrets."

The [article in National
Geographic](http://newswatch.nationalgeographic.com/2013/11/20/rising-star-hominid-what-we-know-and-dont-know/)
that Perez quotes from is about a high profile piece of academic
paleoanthropology where the researchers are doing all their research
"out in the open". They fully plan to publish "normal" papers too. But
they're blogging about all the cool stuff they dig up, and putting
photos of their discoveries online (long before they have enough
evidence to write a full paper).

Update 10:30 UTC 30th Sept 2013
-------------------------------

Wow: the response from twitter to this post has really taken me
(pleasantly) by surprise! This is without doubt the nearest I've had to
something "going viral".

[I tweeted about this blog post at 15:07 on 28th
Nov](https://twitter.com/jack_kelly/status/406076853531594753).

Then, last night (29th Nov) at 20:31,
[OpenScience](https://twitter.com/openscience) retweeted my tweet to
18,534 followers and that started a whole stream of RTs (for which I'm
very grateful!). At the time of writing, [my original
tweet](https://twitter.com/jack_kelly/status/406076853531594753) has
been retweeted 17 times and a ["manual RT" from Tom
Hartley](https://twitter.com/tom_hartley/status/406525302961999872) has
been retweeted a further 6 times. There has also been some discussion of
this blog post on those two twitter conversations.

I am seriously thinking that I should ask my supervisor if I can run the
remainder of my PhD as an experiment in open science and put all my
notes, code, results and data online as soon as I generate them ;)

