---
title: "Teaching 9-12 yearolds robotics with FireTechCamp"
date: 2013-11-05 21:16:20 +0000
categories: ["teaching", "children"]
permalink: /teaching_912_yearolds_robotics_with_firetechcamp
---
<span class="flickr-wrap" style="width:640px;"><span
class="flickr-image">[![](https://farm3.staticflickr.com/2816/10696538766_29ddc816f9_z.jpg)](https://www.flickr.com/photos/37816297@N06/10696538766)</span></span>

Last week, I had the privilege of teaching robotics to kids for the
entire week. I had two groups: in the mornings I had four kids between 9
and 10 years old (shown in the photo above); in the afternoon I had five
kids between 10 and 12 years old. We used [Lego Mindstorms NXT
2.0](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lego_Mindstorms_NXT_2.0) hardware
kits. We programmed the robots using a graphical programming language
called [Enchanting](http://enchanting.robotclub.ab.ca/About) (which is
an extension of [MIT's Scratch](http://scratch.mit.edu/) and [Berkley's
"Build Your Own Blocks (BYOB)"](http://scratch.mit.edu/)). The course
was run by the wonderful [Fire Tech Camp](http://firetechcamp.com/), a
new UK company which runs "tech camps" for kids during school holidays.
FireTechCamp run a number of courses; I only taught on [their robotics
course](http://www.firetechcamp.com/booking/courses/robotics/).

I was very lucky to have another tutor, [Alistair
Poat](https://www.facebook.com/wheelyjoe), with me for the morning
sessions. Ali is not only a great teacher and a lovely guy, but he also
pioneered the FireTechCamp robotics course over summer.

At the end of the week we ran "robot sumo" competitions. It was based on
the robot sumo competition described on the "[Enchanting
Cards](enchanting.robotclub.ab.ca/dl12)". Two robots compete. The aim is
to push the other robot out of the ring. The robots are completely
autonomous. They use an ultrasonic sensor to detect their enemy and they
use a light sensor to detect if they're over the line. Here's a video of
the robot sumo competition we ran for the younger kids:

<iframe width="640" height="360" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/by9Q6BM4hrw" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen>
</iframe>
and here's a video of the competition for the older kids:

<iframe width="640" height="360" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/S203USjmqGM" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen>
</iframe>
Here's one of the Enchating programs for the sumo competition (this code
wasn't spontaneously generated by the kids; it took quite a lot of hand
holding to get this code together. And the code shown below isn't the
final version; the final version put everything into one thread and got
rid of the costume changes):

<span class="flickr-wrap" style="width:640px;"><span
class="flickr-image">[![enchanting\_sumo1](https://farm4.staticflickr.com/3769/10696933015_3e6a24eaf6_z.jpg "enchanting_sumo1")](https://www.flickr.com/photos/37816297@N06/10696933015)</span></span>

Which brings me to one of the things which slightly blew my mind...

Kids naturally create multi-threaded code
-----------------------------------------

The code above has two threads of control. On the left, we have a
"sensing" loop which continually checks the state of the two sensors and
sets two boolean variables. On the right, we have an "action" loop which
acts on the state of the boolean variables (now that I think of it, I'm
really not sure why we bothered ever using two threads but never
mind...).

What really surprised me is that kids just naturally create multiple
threads of control in Enchanting. Literally, on day two, some of the
kids were writing multi-threaded code. At age 10. Why is this so
surprising?

I grew up with single-core computers (specifically the [ZX Spectrum
+2A](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ZX_Spectrum#ZX_Spectrum_.2B2A) and a
few IBM PCs). When I finally decided I wanted to study computer science
formally at Imperial, we were first taught about procedural aspects of
C++, then object orientation, and then we were briefly shown
multi-threaded programming. My take-home message from that first
exposure to multi-threaded programming was "it's bloody horrible and you
should stay well clear if at all possible". (I have subsequently written
a fair few multi-threaded programs and have learnt that it isn't that
frightening... but... anyway...). The point is that, prior to the
FireTechCamp, I thought that multi-threading programming is something
that only trained adults were capable of doing; and that it took great
care. Yet young kids appear to naturally think that multiple threads are
a good way of solving problems which feel "naturally parallel" to them.

During the FireTechCamp tutor's training day about a month ago; I had a
really interesting chat with another tutor about parallel programming.
The conclusion of the conversation was something like this: Today's kids
are swimming in cores no matter which hardware platform we consider:
mobile phones, games consoles, PC CPUs, GPUs etc. Heck, even the Lego
Mindstorms 2.0s have two processors (an ARM and an AVR processor).
Parallel programming is going to be a much larger issue for them (if
they go into software engineering).

So isn't it wonderful that kids *naturally* create multi-threaded
programs, almost without knowing it? (Of course, they don't know about
all the problems of multi-threaded programming). I wonder if there's a
way to encourage and guide that drive to write multi-threaded
programming?

Testing
-------

Another thing which I found suprising is that some of the kids were
somewhat over-confident about their code. If I suggested that they
should test a small piece of (untested) functionality on their robots
before coding more functions; some kids would reply "but I *know* it
works; why do I need to test it?" by which they meant: it *looks* fine
to me therefor it must be fine. They quickly learnt not to be quite so
confident!

Stuff the kids would do when "bunking off"
------------------------------------------

The attention of some of the older kids would sometimes drift. I was
amused to see what they got up to when they were drifting. They
particularly liked:

-   changing the colour scheme of the Windows command line. (It's a
    shame OSes are so big and complex today. I fondly remember getting
    kicks out of disassembling MS-DOS'
    [command.com](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COMMAND.COM) and changing
    some of the text. So instead of it saying "Bad command or file name"
    it might say "Bum command or file name". God I was witty.)
-   Importing models of sports cars into SketchUp
-   Listening to [Skrillex](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skrillex)
    on YouTube.

Levels of abstraction
---------------------

One thing that I took a while to figure out was what "level of
abstraction" to use for each age group. For example, a 10 year old asked
me "does the light sensor ever return negative numbers?" to which my
knee-jerk reply was "what would a negative quantity of light look
like?". I got a totally blank stare in response! I quickly learnt that
not all 10 yearold are ready for a philosophical discussion about
representing physical quantities on a computer!

Engduino
--------

![](http://www.engduino.org/typo3temp/pics/30f7a49532.jpg)

On the last day, we gave the older kids a session on the
[Engduino](http://www.engduino.org/) which is a device designed at UCL.
It's basically an Arduino with a bunch of sensors and LEDs on the PCB so
you can start doing interesting stuff with the board without doing any
electronics first. It's a lovely package. The kids were perfectly
capable of copying out the C code from the work sheets and making basic
little modifications. But it might have been nice to have given them a
quick introduction to C first. For example, one kid asked why we have to
write `void` at the very start of each function definition (as in
`void setup() { /* do something  */ }`) (he didn't use the term
"function definition"!). I tried to explain functions and return values
in 30 seconds and failed misserably.

Summary
-------

I had a really great time and the kids seemed to enjoy themselves too.
Fire Tech Camp are a lovely company to work for. I'd highly recommend
having a go at teaching kids coding. It was *exhausting* though!
Unfortunately I might not get the time to do another week-long course
for a while but I hope to do some more teaching again soon.

