---
title: "\"Making\" workshops with 4-6 yearolds"
date: 2015-09-10 19:42:00 +0000
categories: ["children", "making", "belham"]
permalink: /making_workshops_with_46_yearolds
---
Yesterday I did my first 'making workshop' with fifteen 5-6 yearolds at
our new local primary school, [The
Belham](http://www.thebelhamprimaryschool.org.uk) (my 4-yearold daughter
has just started at The Belham). My hope with these workshops is to
encourage the kids to try building interesting creations and, along the
way, sneak in some stuff they might not have played with yet like basic
electronics. I'll be doing two workshops a month. I suppose the main aim
is to show how much *fun* it is to build stuff (which shouldn't be hard:
the kids seem to know this instinctively).

<span class="flickr-wrap" style="width:640px;"><span
class="flickr-image">[![IMG\_20150909\_145624410](https://farm6.staticflickr.com/5767/21275709816_dd45d3b78a_z.jpg "IMG_20150909_145624410")](https://www.flickr.com/photos/37816297@N06/21275709816)</span></span>

The plan was for the children to get into three groups of five children.
Each group would make one den out of cardboard boxes. If the kids wanted
'windows' cut into their boxes then they'd draw the outline of the
window and an adult would come along and cut out the window. They'd then
run plastic pipe between the dens to make 'telephones'. Then we'd
install lights, batteries and switches in the dens. And it wasn't just
me running the workshop: we had two awesome teaching assistants (i.e.
two full-time staff from the nursery school) who were much better at
handling the kids than I was!

<span class="flickr-wrap" style="width:640px;"><span
class="flickr-image">[![IMG\_20150909\_145713152](https://farm1.staticflickr.com/667/21113691910_bb3d2bb2bc_z.jpg "IMG_20150909_145713152")](https://www.flickr.com/photos/37816297@N06/21113691910)</span></span>

<!--break-->

That was the *plan*! And all of those things *did* happen! Except that
the 'groups' were much more fluid than I had expected; and some groups
split (not through any animosity; just because some children preferred
making their own den or working with one or two of their friends). I
didn't fancy trying to enforce the 'three groups of five kids' idea so I
let them form their own groups (not sure if that was wise?!?) The kids
all had lots of fun!

Well, that's not entirely true... one child got a bit upset towards the
end because he wanted his own den and light but there weren't enough
boxes or lights to allow this. We tried cheering him up. And tried
persuading him that *team work* is important. But we failed to get him
to re-engage which I felt bad about.

Apart from this, the session seemed to go well. It got off to a good
start when several of the children started shouting out "I want to be an
engineer when I grow up!" (this chant was led by a couple of girls, I
hasten to point out. Although I almost feel bad for pointing this out.
That's the way it *should* be, right?!) I was very impressed by some of
the things the kids made, and how excited the children were about what
they were making. They loved making dens that they could climb into. The
size of the box didn't seem to matter too much (as long as it was big
enough for a child to hide in!) They had lots of fun with the pipe
telephones. They loved showing off their creations to their parents at
the end of the day.

I was rather apprehensive about the electronics stuff. I was worried
that the kids wouldn't like the electronics. Or the kit would break. Or
they'd get frustrated when things broke and give up and be put off
electronics for life(!). But I was amazed at how excited they all were
about putting batteries, switches and lights in their dens. And some of
the kids quickly became remarkably good at fixing their circuits when
they broke (and would then help their friends). And they also had fun
trying their own circuits (most of which didn't do anything but they
kept trying!)

<span class="flickr-wrap" style="width:640px;"><span
class="flickr-image">[![IMG\_20150909\_145654918](https://farm1.staticflickr.com/600/21301802705_021f776ff2_z.jpg "IMG_20150909_145654918")](https://www.flickr.com/photos/37816297@N06/21301802705)</span></span>

For the next session, I plan to put the batteries into plastic
enclosures, so all the kids have to do is hook two banana leads into the
battery box, instead of faffing around with crock clips. I also plan to
put self-resetting fuses in the battery boxes, and maybe a buzzer which
will squeak at the kids if the load is a short circuit (so the kids get
instant feedback that 'this circuit is wrong!' without having to wait
for stuff to melt!)

All in all, I had a great time and am looking forward to the next
session!

Please do chip in with any comments / suggestions / examples of other
sessions for similar aged kids.

(By the way, sorry the photos don't include any children. We're not
allowed to show photos of the children on a public website like this
one!)

One aside: some parents and teachers asked me what I do for a job; to
which I replied "computer scientist". Their reaction was always "oh,
wow, that's very different to this". Which kind of surprised me. I think
of building dens with old cardboard boxes and gaffer tape as pretty
similar to doing computer science research! In both situations you start
with an idea of what you want to build and you have a bunch of existing
resources (boxes or code), some of which you can use as is and some of
which can be used with some modification. Some components you need to
build from scratch. And then you set about connecting the bits that you
have into a system. It won't be exactly what you had in mind when you
started. Some of it will be elegant. Some of it will be a last-minute
hack that is (literally or figuratively) held together with tape. Lots
of bits wont work the first time and will need to be pulled apart. If
you're unlucky then, when you're 2/3rds of the way through building, you
realise that what you have in front of you isn't what you need at all so
you start all over again (but you needed to go through that process to
help define what you *really* need). Or maybe you realise that what you
have in front of you can be used for way more tasks than you originally
planned. And that's half the fun of it!

More photos below...

<span class="flickr-wrap" style="width:640px;"><span
class="flickr-image">[![IMG\_20150909\_145635081](https://farm6.staticflickr.com/5679/21310090531_41bfc5e6eb_z.jpg "IMG_20150909_145635081")](https://www.flickr.com/photos/37816297@N06/21310090531)</span></span>

<span class="flickr-wrap" style="width:640px;"><span
class="flickr-image">[![IMG\_20150909\_145827633](https://farm1.staticflickr.com/756/20680614773_d5f251a48f_z.jpg "IMG_20150909_145827633")](https://www.flickr.com/photos/37816297@N06/20680614773)</span></span>

<span class="flickr-wrap" style="width:640px;"><span
class="flickr-image">[![IMG\_20150909\_145832329](https://farm6.staticflickr.com/5639/21275466486_6dbd588b02_z.jpg "IMG_20150909_145832329")](https://www.flickr.com/photos/37816297@N06/21275466486)</span></span>

<span class="flickr-wrap" style="width:640px;"><span
class="flickr-image">[![IMG\_20150909\_145640319\_TOP](https://farm6.staticflickr.com/5683/21310022571_eba3c3c908_z.jpg "IMG_20150909_145640319_TOP")](https://www.flickr.com/photos/37816297@N06/21310022571)</span></span>

<span class="flickr-wrap" style="width:640px;"><span
class="flickr-image">[![IMG\_20150909\_145628672](https://farm6.staticflickr.com/5830/21310096111_1a91bdb8fe_z.jpg "IMG_20150909_145628672")](https://www.flickr.com/photos/37816297@N06/21310096111)</span></span>

<span class="flickr-wrap" style="width:640px;"><span
class="flickr-image">[![IMG\_20150909\_145802022](https://farm1.staticflickr.com/650/21310288411_751b7d5ced_z.jpg "IMG_20150909_145802022")](https://www.flickr.com/photos/37816297@N06/21310288411)</span></span>

