---
title: "April 2017 version of UK-DALE moving to UKERC EDC, and no more data updates :("
categories: [PhD, UK-DALE]
---

I have now left Imperial, so I am moving the April 2017 release of my disaggregated electricity dataset, [UK-DALE](/data/), from my Imperial FTP server to the UK Energy Research Council's [Energy Data Centre](http://ukerc.rl.ac.uk/DC/).  It will take some time to transfer (it's 10 TBytes!) but you can already see [some of the data on the EDC](http://data.ukedc.rl.ac.uk/simplebrowse/edc/efficiency/residential/EnergyConsumption/Domestic/UK-DALE-2017).

Also, because I am unlikely to be working on energy disaggregation in the foreseeable future, and because it isn't really practical to store and publish more than 10 TBytes of data without a university's faster Internet connection, I have stopped recording UK-DALE in my house (House 1).  It's also a little tedious to collect data from a house; and we're about to do some building work so the plugs and data logger would have been disturbed anyway.  So the April 2017 update will be the last update of UK-DALE!  I felt a little sad taking it all apart; I really enjoyed engineering the data collection system.

On the up-side, removing the data collection system will probably - and somewhat ironically - reduce our home's energy consumption (because the plugs and data logger constantly draw power)!  With all the individual appliance monitors (IAM) connected, our power demand never dropped below 145.3 VA (apparent), 108.6 W (active) (as measured by my sound-card-power-meter).  After unplugging all but one IAM, our minimum power demand dropped to 112.2 VA (apparent), 84.1 W (active).  And, after disconnecting the data logger, that should drop by another 14 W (12 W for the PC, 2 W for the IAM connected to the PC)!  So that's a total drop of 38.5 W (active) that was constantly being drawn: an energy saving of 0.9 kWh per day!  Subtracting the energy consumed by the IAMs, UK-DALE House 1 actually submetered about 87% of the home's energy consumption, not 80% as stated in [Table 1 of our UK-DALE paper](https://www.nature.com/articles/sdata20157/tables/1).